# 2.3 Executing Robot

::::lo[Learning Objectives]

:::K1[LO-2.3]

Recall the three components of the Robot Framework CLI.

:::

::::

Robot Framework comes with three executables when being installed which are designed to be used via the command-line interface (CLI).

- `robot` is the main executable that is used to execute suites.
- `rebot` (not part of this syllabus) is used to post-process execution results and generate reports.
- `libdoc` (not part of this syllabus) is used to generate :term[keyword]{term="Keyword"} documentation for libraries and :term[resource files]{term="Resource File"}. See [2.5 Keyword Interface and Documentation](chapter-02/05_keyword_interface.md)## 2.3.1 `robot` command & help

::::lo[Learning Objectives]

:::K2[LO-2.3.1]

Understand how to run the `robot` command and its basic usage.

:::

::::

The `robot` command is used to run a Robot Framework execution, which will execute suites and their containing tests|:term[tasks]{term="Task"}.

At a basic level, you can run `robot` by providing the path to a :term[suite file]{term="Suite File"} or suite directory containing :term[suite files]{term="Suite File"} as last :term[argument]{term="Argument"}.
```plaintext
robot <path_to_root_suite>
```

In case of the [2.2.5 Example Suite File](chapter-02/02_suitefile_syntax.md#225-example-suite-file) where a single :term[suite file]{term="Suite File"} named `TestSuite.robot` is stored in a directory `robot_files`, to execute the example :term[test]{term="Test Case"} suite the following command is used, if the current working directory of the terminal is the directory containing the `robot_files` directory:
```plaintext
> robot robot_files
```

This command starts the Robot Framework execution by first parsing all files in the given directory tree that have the extension `.robot`,
then creates an :term[execution model]{term="Execution Model"} and finally, executes all suites with their :term[test cases]{term="Test Case"} from that model.
During execution, the results of each :term[test case]{term="Test Case"} are printed to the console and at the end a summary is printed and reports are generated.

Example Console Output:
```plaintext title="Console Output"
> robot robot_files
==============================================================================
Robot Files
==============================================================================
Robot Files.TestSuite :: A test suite for valid login.
==============================================================================
Login User With Password                                              | PASS |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Denied Login With Wrong Password                                      | PASS |
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Robot Files.TestSuite :: A test suite for valid login.                | PASS |
2 tests, 2 passed, 0 failed
==============================================================================
Robot Files                                                           | PASS |
2 tests, 2 passed, 0 failed
==============================================================================
Output:  /path/to/output.xml
Log:     /path/to/log.html
Report:  /path/to/report.html
```

The `robot` command can optionally be configured with additional options to control the execution behavior, such as setting output formats, specifying specific tests to run, or controlling logging levels and many more. These options are :term[named arguments]{term="Named Argument"} that are passed to the `robot` command BEFORE the path to the suite file or directory. To learn more about these options, you can use the help of the `robot` command like: `robot --help`.



## 2.3.2 Execution Artifacts

::::lo[Learning Objectives]

:::K2[LO-2.3.2]

Explain the execution artifacts generated by Robot Framework.

:::

::::

After executing a suite, Robot Framework, by default, generates three output files in the output directory. These artifacts provide detailed execution results:

- **`output.xml`**: A machine-readable file containing **ALL** logged execution details, limited by the given log-level.
- **`log.html`**: A detailed log file that provides an HTML view of the execution, including :term[keyword]{term="Keyword"}-level details.
- **`report.html`**: A summary report that gives an overview of the execution results, including statistics of tests|:term[tasks]{term="Task"} executed, passed, and failed.

`log.html` and `report.html` are generated based on the information stored in `output.xml`.

A unique feature of Robot Framework is, that it logs each keyword call and its :term[arguments]{term="Argument"} with its log outputs and timestamps, so that it is possible to have a very detailed view of the execution flow and the data that was used during the execution.
In case of a failure it is possible to see the exact keyword call that failed and the :term[arguments]{term="Argument"} that were used, which can be very helpful for debugging or reporting. Furthermore, you also get all passed :term[keywords]{term="Keyword"} and even the non‑executed :term[keywords]{term="Keyword"}, allowing you to trace the whole execution flow.



## 2.3.3 Status

::::lo[Learning Objectives]

:::K1[LO-2.3.3]

Recall the four different status labels used by Robot Framework.

:::

::::

Robot Framework uses different status labels to indicate the result of an execution:

On Suite, :term[Test Case]{term="Test Case"}, :term[Task]{term="Task"} and Keyword Level:
- **`PASS`**: Indicates that the item was successfully executed without unexpected errors.
- **`FAIL`**: Shows that the item encountered an error and did not pass.
- **`SKIP`**: Indicates that the item was intentionally skipped, either by tagging or during execution, typically because some condition was not met.

Additional Keyword Status:
- **`NOT RUN`**: Refers to keywords that were not executed during execution, e.g. due to previous failure or conditions.

`SKIP` is explained in more detail in later chapters.

**Atomic elements** like Library Keywords or Robot Framework language statements do define their own status.

**Composite elements** like suites (composed of tests|tasks), tests|tasks (composed of keywords) and :term[User Keywords]{term="User Keyword"} (composed of Library Keywords and Robot Framework statements) do define their status based on the status of their child elements.


### 2.3.3.1 PASS

::::lo[Learning Objectives]

:::K2[LO-2.3.3.1]

Understand when an element is marked as `PASS`.

:::

::::

This status is used if an element was executed successfully without any errors or exceptions.

**Atomic elements** are `PASS` if they were executed successfully without reporting an error by raising an exception.

**Composite elements** are `PASS` if all their executed body elements are pass.
E.g. in case of :term[User Keywords]{term="User Keyword"} this means that if all keywords or Robot Framework language statements that were directly called by that :term[User Keyword]{term="User Keyword"} were `PASS` the :term[User Keyword]{term="User Keyword"} itself is considered `PASS`.

Library Keywords like `Run Keyword And Expect Error`, from BuiltIn Library, do `PASS` if the keyword they are internally calling does raise an error with the expected message or type.

That means that a :term[composite element]{term="Composite Element"} like suite, :term[test]{term="Test Case"}|:term[task]{term="Task"} or User Keyword may be `PASS` even if some of its deeper child elements are `FAIL`.


### 2.3.3.2 FAIL

::::lo[Learning Objectives]

:::K2[LO-2.3.3.2]

Understand when an element is marked as `FAIL`.

:::

::::

This status is used if an element was executed but encountered an unexpected error or exception.

A failure typically causes the subsequent keywords not to be executed and to receive the status `NOT RUN`.
Exceptions are teardowns, as explained in [Chapter 4: Advanced Structuring and Execution](chapter-04/00_overview.md).

**Atomic elements** are `FAIL` if they were tried to be executed but raised an exception.

**Composite elements** are `FAIL` if at least one of their executed direct body elements are `FAIL`.
Therefore a failure typically distributes upwards through the hierarchy of elements until it reaches the :term[root suite]{term="Root Suite"}.

A User Keyword is `FAIL` if one of its called Library Keywords is `FAIL`.
A test|task is `FAIL` if one of its directly called Keywords is `FAIL`.
A suite (file) is `FAIL` if one of its tests|tasks is `FAIL` and
a suite (directory) is `FAIL` if one of its suites (file) is `FAIL`.



## 2.3.4 Logging possibilities (Log vs Console)

::::lo[Learning Objectives]

:::K2[LO-2.3.4]

Understand the difference between log messages and console output.

:::

::::

There are basically two kinds of logging information in Robot Framework.

- **Console Output**: The console output is the output that is printed to the terminal where the `robot` command was executed. It is typically not persistent but can be already seen during execution.
- **Log Messages**: Log messages are written to the `output.xml` and therefore also `log.html` file and are persistent. They are typically created by the Library Keywords that are executed and can be used to log information about the execution. Also Robot Framework itself does log information to the `output.xml` like assigned values of arguments or the return values of keywords.

Log messages can be written with different levels of severity (i.e. `INFO`, `DEBUG`, `TRACE`, `WARN` or `ERROR`).
Which levels are written to the log can be controlled by the log level of an execution. Further information in later chapters.




